Java Tutorial
Last Updated : 28 Apr, 2026
Java is a high-level, object-oriented programming language used to build web apps, mobile applications, and enterprise software systems.

Java is a platform-independent language, which means code written in Java can run on any device that supports the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
Syntax and structure are similar to C-based languages like C++ and C#.
introduction.webpintroduction.webp
Hello World Program
The following is a simple program that displays the message “Hello, World!” on the screen.

public class Geeks{
public static void main(String[] args) {
System.out.println("Hello World!");
}
}
Output
Hello World!
Explanation: Above program defines a class Geeks with a main method that serves as the entry point and prints "Hello World!" to the console.
Why Learn Java?
Used to build Android apps, desktop and web apps, enterprise backend systems, and cloud-based software.
In high demand with many job opportunities in software development.
Has popular frameworks like Spring and Hibernate which makes it powerful for enterprise applications.
Supports object-oriented programming for clean, maintainable and reusable code.
Top companies like Amazon, Netflix, and LinkedIn use Java.
Basics
Understand core Java concepts such as syntax, variables, data types, loops, and decision-making to start your programming journey.

Introduction
Download and Install Java
JDK vs JRE vs JVM
Taking Input
Print output
Identifiers
Keywords
Data Types
Wrapper Classes
Variables
Operators
Decision Making
Loops and Jump Statements
Project: Number Guessing Game
Methods
Java methods are reusable blocks of code that perform specific tasks and help organize your program. They improve code readability, reduce repetition, and make debugging easier.

Introduction
Static Methods vs Instance Methods
Access Modifiers
Command Line Arguments
Variable Arguments (Varargs)
Arrays
Java arrays are containers that store multiple values of the same data type in a single variable. They provide an efficient way to manage and access collections of data using index-based positions.

Introduction
Multi-Dimensional Arrays
Jagged Arrays
Arrays Class
Final Arrays
Projects: Tic-Tac-Toe Game
Strings
Java Strings represent sequences of characters and are widely used in text processing. They are immutable, meaning once created, their values cannot be changed.

Introduction
Why Strings are Immutable
String Concatenation
String Methods
String Class
StringBuffer Class
StringBuilder Class
Strings vs StringBuffer vs StringBuilder
OOP Concepts
Java follows the Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) paradigm, which organizes code into classes and objects. Core OOP principles like inheritance, encapsulation, polymorphism, and abstraction make Java modular and scalable.

Introduction
Classes and Objects
Constructors
Object Class
Abstraction
Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism
Packages
Project: Simple Banking Application
Interfaces
Java interfaces define a contract that classes must follow, specifying method signatures without implementations. They enable abstraction and support multiple inheritance in Java through a clean, structured approach.

Interfaces
Class vs Interface
Functional Interface
Nested Interface
Marker Interface
Project: Employee Management System
Exception Handling
Java Exception Handling is a mechanism to handle runtime errors, ensuring the program runs smoothly without crashing. It uses keywords like try, catch, throw, throws, and finally to manage exceptions.

Introduction
Try-Catch Block
Final, Finally and Finalize
Throw and Throws
Customized Exception Handling
Chained Exceptions
Null Pointer Exceptions
Exception Handling with Method Overriding
Regex
Java Regex (Regular Expressions) allows pattern matching and text manipulation using the java.util.regex package. It is powerful for validating, searching, and replacing strings based on specific patterns.

Introduction
Matcher Class
Character Class
Quantifiers
Memory Allocation
Java Memory Allocation refers to how memory is assigned to variables, objects, and classes during program execution. It involves stack and heap memory, with the JVM managing allocation and garbage collection automatically.

Java Memory Management
How Java Objects Stored in Memory?
Types of Memory Areas Allocated by JVM
Stack vs Heap Memory Allocation
Garbage Collection
Types of JVM Garbage Collectors
Memory Leaks
Collections
Java Collections provide a framework for storing and manipulating groups of objects efficiently. It includes interfaces like List, Set, and Map, along with classes like ArrayList, HashSet, and HashMap.
